###warm-up------(collected from seniors)
Normalization ______ data duplication. 
Answer ) Eliminates 
In terms of databases, what does consistency mean? 
Answer) The data stored several times in the same format 
Why are duplicate tuples not allowed in a relation? 
Answer) the relational data model applies set theory 
When mapping a binary many-to-many ER relationship into the relation model which of the following is true ?
Answer) Three relations are created 
Thinking of data, information and knowledge – which of the following is an example of information?
Answer ) the average men’s shoe size is nine 
In order to perform a natural join the following need to be true : 
Answer)
-It is based on equal-join 
-attributes with identical domains for the join
-attributes with identical names for the join 
You can specify on individual relations the following constraints: 
Answer) 
-entity integrity constraint 
-key constraint 
why are tuples in a relation not ordered? 
Answer) the relational data model applies set theory 
What is the difference between an entity and attribute? 
Answer) An attribute is a field in a database and an entity is a table 
Which of the following is true? 
Answer) A DMBS separates applications from data 

The universe constraint specifies – for an attribute set which may have redundant attributes – that no two distinct tuples in any state r of R can have the same value for the attribute set called _______.
Answer) Super key 
The relational model’s domain constraint is a _______ . 
Answer) Schema-based constraint 
Which of the following symbols is not used in an ERD ?
Answer) circle 
A prime attribute means: 
Answer) it is a member of some candidate  key of R 
If a relation is in BCNF, then it is also in 
Answer) All of the above ( 1NF, 2NF,3NF) 
Extra notes: 
Another name for weak entity is child
In terms of database what does consistency mean?
- All users have the same view of data
Why are duplicate tuples not allowed in a relation?
- The relational data model not allows redundancy
What is the difference between entity and an attribute?
- An attribute is a field in a database and an entity is a table
The uniqueness constraint specifies – for an attribute set which may have redundant attrbute – that no 
two distinct tuples in any state r of R can have the same value for the attribute set called _____
- Super key
Which of the following symbol is not used in ERD?
- Circle
A prime attribute means 
- It is a member of some candidate key of R
If a relation is in BCNF, then it is also in
- All of the above

EXAM_MCQ----my answers

1. which type of entity cannont exist in the database unless another type of entity also exist in the database but does not exist require that 
the identifier of that other entity be included as part of its own identifier(2024,2022)

a. weak entity.
b. strong entity.
c. ID-dependent entity.
d. ID-independent entity.

answer: a



2. The different classes of relations created by the technique for preventing modification anomalies are called:(2024,2022,2018)
 
a. Normal forms.
b. Referential integrity constraints.
c. functional dependencies.
d. None of above is correct.

answer: a



3. A keys:(2024)

a. Must always be composed of two or more columns.
b. can only be one column.
c. identifies a row.
d. identifies a column.

answer:  c



4. If a table has been normalized so that all determinants are candidate keys, then the table is in:(2024)

a. 1NF.
b. 2NF.
c. 3NF.
d. BCNF.

answer: d



5. When the values is one or more attributes being used as foreign key must exist in another set of one or 
more attributes ib another tables, we have created a(n):(2024,2022)

a. transitive dependency.
b. insertion anomaly.
c. referential integrity constraint.
d. normal form.
answer: c


6. A functional dependency is a relationship between or among:(2024)

a. tables.
b. rows.
c. relations.
d. attributes.

answer:d

7.______________ is the minimal superkey.(2022)
a.primary key
b.candidate key
c.foreign key
d.alternate key
e.unique key

answer:b

8.Metadata about structure of database is stored in:(2022)
a.data files
b.indices
c.data dictionary 
d.metadata files

answer:c

9.In the relational model ,relationship between relations or tables are created by:(2022,2018)
a.composite key
b.determinants
c.candidate keys
d.foreign keys

answer:d

10.A combination of Cartesian Product followed by selection process:(2022)
a.association
b.product formalization
c.joins
d.protocol

answer:c

11.Functional dependencies are the  types of constraints that are based on:(2018)
a.keys
b.key revisited
c.superset keys
d.none of these

answer:a

12.Database ------- is the logical design of the data and the database ----------
which is snapshot of data at a given instance of time.(2018)
a.instance, schema
b.relation, schema
c.relation, domain
d.schema, instance

answer:d

13.The tuples of the relations can be of _________ order.(2018)
a.any
b.same
c.sorted
d.constant

answer:a
14.Which one of the following is a set of one or more attributes taken collectively to uniquely 
identify a record:(2018)
a.candidate key
b.sub key
c.super key
d.foreign key

answer:c

15.Tables in Second Normal Form:(2NF)  (2018)
a.eliminates all hidden dependencies
b.eliminates all possibilities of insertion anamolies
c.have a composite key
d.have all non-key fields depend on the whole primary key

answer:a

16.







